# 11.6 Testing Hypotheses from Experiments  
Tags: #Math #Statistics #Algebra_2 

Goals:
- Use two hypotheses to draw conclusions 
- Use graphs and [[simulation]] to determine whether differences between **[[parameters]]** are significant
- Use data from a randomized experiment to evaluate a report

**Hypothesis**
	claim or statement about a property of a population.

## 4 steps of writing a hypothesis
1. Determine what your question means in terms of a parameter 
2. State this info about the parameter mathematically 
3. State what would happen if this hypothesis is not true 
4. Write the null hypothesis and alternative hypothesis 

**[[Null hypothesis]]** (H<sub>0</sub>) 
	a statement that says that a parameter is *equal* to a value, where the expected value is equal to reality 
ex. I think that my blaze farm design will be about the same as my brother's design–1000 rods per hour. 
$$H_{0}:\mu=1000$$

**Alternative hypothesis (H<sub>a</sub>)** 
	a statement that contradicts the Null hypothesis
*Note: must include <, >, or ≠* 
ex. After extensive testing, my blaze farm produces 100 more blaze rods than my brother's. 

$$H_{a}:\mu>1000$$


### Examples
###### Write the following situations into hypotheses. 

1. The proportion of drivers who admit to running red lights is greater than 0. 5. 
$$H_{0}:p=0.5,H_{a}:p>0.5$$
2. The mean height of professional basketball players is at most 7 ft. 
$$H_{0}:\mu=7,H_{a}:\mu<7$$
3. The standard deviation of IQ scores of actors is equal to 15. 
$$H_{0}:\sigma=15,H_{a}:\sigma≠15$$
4. Is my viola shorter than most violas? 
$$H_{0}:\mu=40.64,H_{a}:\mu<40.64$$
A car has been getting 34. 6 miles per gallon. With a fuel additive, the car gets 35. 3 miles per gallon.  What hypotheses would you test to determine whether the increase in mileage is due to the additive? 

If the increase in mileage is not due to the additive, then the mean gas mileage, $\sigma$, would be equal to the miles its been getting: 34.6. If the mileage does increase, then the new mileage would be greater than 34.6. 
$$H_{0}:\mu=34.6,H_{a}:\mu>34.6$$

## Examine data from an experiment  
A car company performed an experiment and recorded gas mileage of 10 identical cars all driven in the same conditions with and without the fuel additive. 

| Without additive | 34.1 | 33.8 | 36.7 | 35.1 | 33.1 |     |     |
| ---------------- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | 
| With additive    | 34.8 | 32.9 | 36.1 | 36.0 | 36.8 |     |     |     |     |     |     |

### Use simulation results to test hypotheses  
??? How do you make simulation? Do we have enough data to do so? 

## Evaluate report based on data

1. Write the null hypothesis and alternative hypothesis for the study 
2. Calculate the margin of error for the new sample 
3. Use sample statistic and margin of error to predict a range of reasonable values estimating the population parameter 
4. Compare the claim to the predicted interval. If mean in claim is within range, then data does not disprove the claim

### Examples 
1. Best Bet Mac&Cheese reports that the average price for a box of their product is $1.45. A marketing company selects a national sample of 100 retail prices. The standard deviation of prices nationally is $0.20 and the mean of the prices of the sample is $1.65. Does this study provide strong evidence that Best Bet’s claim is false? 

$$H_{0}:\mu=1.45,H_{a}:\mu>1.45$$
$$E = \frac{2\sigma}{\sqrt{n}}\rightarrow E = \frac{2(0.2)}{\sqrt{100}}\rightarrow E=\frac{0.4}{10}\rightarrow E=0.04$$
Reasonable range: 1.41~1.49 

This study provides strong evidence that Best Bet's claim is false, as the results of the study are much higher than what Best Bet Mac&Cheese reported, past the margin of error. The z-score for the report is $\frac{1.45-1.65}{0.2}=-1$, meaning that there is a %99.84134 chance the claim is false. 

3. Best Bet revises their claim and report average retail price of $1.60. The second marketing study sampled 300 prices with a mean price of $1.64. 

$$H_{0}:\mu=1.60,H_{a}:\mu>1.60$$
$$E = \frac{2\sigma}{\sqrt{n}}\rightarrow E = \frac{2(0.2)}{\sqrt{300}}\rightarrow E=\frac{0.4}{17.3}\rightarrow E=0.02$$
Resonable range: 1.58~1.62 

Again, Best Bet's claim is outside of the margin of error and is likely that their claim is false. 

## Classwork
1.  Ms. Brower runs the 800-meter race in an average of 2.3 min. After buying new racing shoes, she reduces her average time to 2.2 min. Write the null and alternative hypotheses to determine whether her increase in speed is due to her new shoes. 

$$H_{0}:\mu=2.3,H_{a}:\mu<2.3$$

2. A golf club company states that using their driver (a type of golf club) will increase the distance the ball travels when striking the ball using the driver. A study between an experimental group and a control group showed that the group using other brands of drivers hit the ball an average distance of 200 ft, and the group using the company’s driver hit the ball an average distance of 230 ft. Regina writes the hypotheses used to determine golf-ball distance as follows: $H_{0}:\mu≤230,H_{a}:\mu>230$ What mistake did she make?

Although the control group hit less than 230 ft, the null hypothesis must include an equal sign, as it is saying that the driver has no effect. She must change it to $H_{0}:\mu=200$ and first expect the driver to have no effect. She must also change the alternative hypothesis to $H_{a}:\mu>200$, because the experiment is trying to say that the driver increases the distance of the ball. 

4.  Better Computing reports that they sell their 64 GB tablet for an average of $260, with a standard deviation of $5.00. A marketing company selects a national sample of 100 retail prices. They found the average Better Computing 64 GB tablet cost $265. Does the study prove that Better Computing’s report is true or false? 

$$E = \frac{2\sigma}{\sqrt{n}}\rightarrow E = \frac{2(5)}{\sqrt{100}}\rightarrow E=\frac{10}{10}\rightarrow E=1$$

The margin of error is only one dollar, whereas the study found an average price of $265, 5 dollars away from Better Computing's claims. **As the study is outside the margin error, this study can prove that Better Computing's report is false.**

## Homework 
9. **Error Analysis** Jake’s average bowling score was 230. Jake bought a new bowling ball. Since using the new bowling ball Jake’s average score has improved to 250. He wrote the null hypothesis and alternative hypothesis for a statistical study to evaluate the effect of the new ball on his bowling score. Explain his error. $$H_0:s≤250,H_a:s>250$$
The null hypothesis must claim that there is *no* affect on whatever it is. So for this example, the null hypothesis must state that the score with the new bowling score is equal to 230. The alternate hypothesis must contradict that and state that the score will be greater than 230. 
$$H_0:s=230,H_a:s>230$$

12. Tavon had an average time for the 100-yd dash of 18 seconds. Since starting a strength-training program, he has been running the 100-yd dash in an average time of 15 seconds. Write the null hypothesis and alternative hypothesis for a statistical study to evaluate the effect of the training on Tavon’s time in the 100-yd dash.
$$H_0:t=18,H_a:t<18$$
13. The coach wants to perform an experiment to determine whether strength training impacts a runner’s speed. The coach completed several trials and recorded the speeds of the 100-yd dash (in seconds) of a sample of five track  athletes both before and after they tried strength training. 

| Without Training | 18  | 20  | 16  | 15  | 14  |
| ---------------- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| With Training    | 15  | 19  | 17  | 16  | 14  |

	a. Find the sample means and their difference. Resample the data so that one group has these data values: 15, 20, 17, 15, 14. Identify the data values for the other group.

Without Training mean: 16.6 
With Training mean: 16.2 
Mean difference: 0.4 

| Without Training | 18  | 19  | 16  | 16  | 14  |
| ---------------- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| With Training    | 15  | 20  | 17  | 15  | 14  |                 |     |     |     |     |     |

	c. Calculate the difference of the means for the two resample groups.

New Without Training mean: 16.6 
New With Training mean: 16.2 
Mean difference: 0.4 

14. The training regimen was tested again, resulting in the data displayed below. Use a simulation to randomize the data without replacement, creating 50 new groupings. Create a histogram of the differences between group means to display your results. Use the data to draw a conclusion about the initial hypothesis. 

Without Vitamins 14 12 18 19 15
With Vitamins 15 12 16 18 14

???????

15. Grain Goodness reports the average price for a box of their granola is $3.87. A marketing company selects a national sample of 100 retail prices and states the mean price was $4.42. The standard deviation was $0.60. What is the margin of error for this new sample? 

$$E = \frac{2\sigma}{\sqrt{n}}\rightarrow E = \frac{2(0.6)}{\sqrt{100}}\rightarrow E=\frac{1.2}{10}\rightarrow E=0.12$$

The margin of error, or $E$, is $0.12. 

16. **Model with Mathematics** A botanist is doing an experimental research study to determine whether a certain fertilizer will increase the yield of soybean plants. The botanist included several soybean farmers in his study. The average yield of soybeans for each farmer (in bushels per acre) of the crops with and without fertilizer are recorded in the table shown.

| Without Fertilizer | 40  | 42  | 45  | 50  | 47  |
| ---------------- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| With Fertilizer    | 42  | 40  | 46  | 49  | 48  |                 |     |     |     |     |     |

Find the means of both samples and their difference. State how the average yield of the soybean crops with the fertilizer compares to the average yield of the soybean crops without fertilizer. 

Without Fertilizer mean: 44.8 
WIth Fertilizer: 45 
The difference between the average yield of the soybean crops with and without the fertilizer is only 0.2, which could be statistically insignificant. There isn't enough information to determine the margin of error however. 

17. **Communicate Precisely** A randomization of the data from Exercise 16, placed into two new random groups, is shown in the table.

| Without Fertilizer | 46  | 50  | 40  | 42  | 47  |
| ---------------- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| With Fertilizer    | 40  | 49  | 42  | 48  | 45  |                 |     |     |     |     |     |

a. Find the difference between the sample means of the new groups.

Without Fertilizer mean: 45 
With Fertilizer mean: 44.8 

b. Does it provide evidence that the difference in the original two sample means is due to the effects of the fertilizer or just due to chance? 

This is evidence that the difference in the two samples were due to chance, as after a randomization of the data, the difference between the means stayed the same. The original difference could've been just due to chance. 

**18. Make Sense and Persevere** The rules state that a baseball must have a circumference within 3mm of 232mm. What hypotheses would you test to determine whether the baseballs made on a new machine are within the specifications? 
$$E_0:c=232,E_a:c≠232±3$$
