# A friend to all is a friend to none 
Tags: #Quote #Reflection 

Below is an excerpt from Aristotle's "Nicomachean Ethics," Book 9, chapter 10, pages 1170–1171. God bless [this](https://english.stackexchange.com/questions/312110/a-friend-to-all-is-a-friend-to-none-aristotle-what-does-this-exactly-mean) guy for finding this. 

"So for friends, too, there is a fixed number—perhaps the largest number with whom one can live together (for that, we found, is thought to be very characteristic of friendship); and that one cannot live with many people and divide oneself up among them is plain. Further, they too must be friends of one another, if they are all to spend their days together; and it is a hard business for this condition to be fulfilled with a large number. It is found difficult, too, to rejoice and to grieve in an intimate way with many people, for it may likely happen that one has at once to be happy with one friend and to mourn with another. Presumably, then, it is well not to seek to have as many friends as possible, but as many as are enough for the purpose of living together; for it would seem actually impossible to be a great friend to many people. This is why one cannot love several people; love is ideally a sort of excess of friendship, and that can only be felt towards one person; therefore great friendship, too, can only be felt towards a few people. This seems to be confirmed in practice; for we do not find many people who are friends in a comradely way of friendship, and the famous friendships of this sort are always between two people. **Those who have many friends and mix intimately with them all are thought to be no one's friend**, except in the way proper to fellow-citizens, and such people are also called obsequious. In the way proper to fellow-citizens, indeed, it is possible to be the friend of many and yet not be obsequious but a genuinely good man; but one cannot have with many people the friendship based on virtue and on the character of our friends themselves, and we must be content if we find even a few such." 

--- 
### Apr 6 2022 
I thought of this quote when I remembered it being in a personality test page for INTJ. I'm not an INTJ now, but ISTP, but it still stood out to me and still does today when I read it. I can very much relate to it today, where I feel too friendly to everyone that I'm not close with anyone else. Of course, I can think of people I'm close with, such as Jason, but I wonder if my friendliness to everyone limits my friendliness to Jason. Of course, I can't think of "friendliness" as something tangible that I keep or give away, but it doesn't entirely make no sense. Maybe I'm one of the few good men in the world that Aristotle mentioned here: "In the way proper to fellow-citizens, indeed, it is possible to be the friend of many and yet not be obsequious but a genuinely good man; but one cannot have with many people the friendship based on virtue and on the character of our friends themselves, and we must be content if we find even a few such." Maybe. Whatever it is, I don't care and I have a lot of things I have to finish right now–why am I writing this.. 