---
tags:
- Extract
- China
---
# Orwell's Nineteen Eighty- Four and Mao's Cultural Revolution 
F. Quei Quo 

Quo is Professor of Political Science at Simon Fraser University. He is the author of Political Systems: An Introductory Analysis (1972) and co-editor of Parliament, Policy and Representation (1980). He has published many articles on the politics of Pacific Rim countries.

[[Peter Buitenhuis, Ira B. Nadel (eds.) - George Orwell_ A Reassessment-Palgrave Macmillan UK (1988).pdf#page=136]]

Referring to Orwell's *Nineteen Eighty-Four*, Pierre Ryckmans, author of *Chinese Shadows*, stated that:

>Without even dreaming of Mao's China, Orwell succeeded in describing it, down to concrete details of daily life, with more truth and accuracy than most researchers who came back from Peking to tell us 'the real truth'.

There were others who had similarly compared conditions in China in the days of the Great Proletariat Cultural Revolution with life under Ingsoc in Orwell's *Nineteen Eighty-Four*. The similarities are undeniable, yet the fact remains that Mao and his associates did not have Orwell's *Nineteen Eighty-Four* as their drill manual in 1966 when the great upheaval in China was launched. As a matter of fact, it was only this year that I found Orwell's *Nineteen Eighty-Four* and Crick's book on Orwell in the Penguin shelf at the Beijing Friendship Store. Was there really that much similarity between the Big Brother and Chairman Mao, Goldstein and Liu Shaoqi/Lin Biao, Newspeak and the jargon of the Cultural Revolution, and the 'doublethink' and the ambiguities of 'revolutionary' and 'counter- revolutionary'?

In an article published late in 1966, George Kateb, like many of us who had no idea at that time that an Orwellian experiment had just begun in China, conceded the charge that the world of *Nineteen Eighty-Four* was unreal and its message unsound. To claim *Nineteen Eighty-Four* nonetheless as a meaningful contribution to the study of politics Kateb wrote:

>The system (of 1984) as a whole is endowed with a coherence that no system in the real world has ever had. Orwell asked himself the sociological question, What are the institutions required for a group of men in the modem world to wield absolute power? and the answer comes out in every detail, major and minor, of 1984. In that respect the book is a tour de force, one of the most successful acts of political imagination ever made. Reading it, one is thereafter made sensitive to any happening in the world that resembles, even slightly, something in 1984: one is also equipped to examine dictatorships and oligarchies, past and present, with heightened understanding. One's perception of even normal politics is altered. 1984 is a splendid work in defense of freedom and equality. By predicting the future it may help to defeat its predictions; for that tactic to work, exaggeration is probably necessary. An image of pure evil must be presented, in order to sicken the decent man and make him more passionate in his attachment to the kinds of political good he still may be fortunate to enjoy.

Events of the Cultural Revolution prove that Orwell's imagination was no exaggeration; it can and did happen! The Big Brother was not only omnipresent but also omnipotent in China. By early 1967, the portrait of Mao was everywhere and the little Red Book of Quotations of Chairman Mao was in every waving hand of the masses that gathered for all kinds of 'anti' campaigns. No speech was complete without quotations from the Red Book and no gatherings could end without shouting slogans demanding 'Down with' somebody or something, and roaring 'Long live' the Chairman. The cult of personality went as far as identifying all causes of success, ranging between winning a ping-pong tournament and launching the first missile, to the teaching of the Chairman. At the same time all kinds of capitalist crimes, counter-revolutionary thoughts and revisionist trends amongst the individuals were uncovered and made responsible for the incompleteness of the revolution.

In *Nineteen Eighty-Four* Winston wants to know the history of Oceania - the Revolution and the life before the Revolution. With the exception of an old drunk who faintly remembers the old days, there is nowhere he can find the truth. For 'Every record has been destroyed or falsified, every book has been rewritten, every picture has been re-painted, every statue and street and building has been renamed, every date has been altered' (p. 290). In China the Red Guards ransacked homes, buildings, temples and burnt tons of books, documents and even furniture. They renamed streets, buildings and sometimes even themselves. Everything was crowned with 'victory', as Orwell predicted, or turned 'red' as Mao preferred: Victory cigarette, Victory Oilfield, Red Machine Factory, Red Star Restaurant, and so on. In Shanghai and Beijing there were two 'Writing Teams' manufacturing new historical stories everyday. 'Lian Hsiao' and 'Ro Suding' were the pennames of Jian Qing's literary gangs who rewrote a great portion of Chinese history. Good guys were transformed into bad guys and vice-versa. Competent Imperial ministers became anti-revolutionaries and the cruel Empresses were converted to great rulers of the dynasties. All this was the work of what Orwell would have readily recognised as the Ministry of Truth!

The proliferation of a new jargon, a veritable Newspeak, made an observer comment that 'the best glossaries of Maoist phraseology are out-of-date a year after being printed'. Here are some examples:

*Walking on two-legs:* Mao's idea of applying both the modern and pre-modern ways of production.  
*Three-Eight Working Style:* the three phrases and eight characters written by Mao to describe the working style to be adopted by everyone; they are: political direction, simple and arduous working style, flexible strategy and tactics, and 'united, tense, stern and lively'.
*Four Firsts:* the priorities set by Lin Biao, namely, the human factor first, political work first, ideological work first and living ideas first.  
*Four Togetherness:* the requirement that cadres eat, live, toil and discuss with farmers or workers.

The list can go on ad infinitum. The Asian Research Centre in Hong Kong had to append a nearly fifty-page Glossary for its readers in its first volume on the Great Cultural Revolution published in English in 1968.

The terms in the Glossary were chillingly close to those in the 'B vocabulary' of *Nineteen Eighty-Four*. A great many of them were euphemisms, ideologically loaded, and were constructed deliberately for political purposes, just as Orwell defined them (pp. 420- 6). The frequent use of numbered abbreviations was perhaps intended to conceal the discrepancy that might have existed between the ideographic Chinese language and the reality. The 'May 7th Cadre School' serves as the best example. AIl labour camps the cadres went to were called by that name. They could not by any stretch of the imagination be included in the traditional usage of the word 'school'. It was the hard labour required of every cadre by Mao's edict dated 7 May 1967.

Doublethink, according to Orwell, is 'the power of holding two contradictory beliefs in one's mind simultaneously, and accepting both of them' (p. 342). Indeed, it required more than 'doublethink' for one to survive through the Cultural Revolution without scars in one's mind. The man who wrote the handbook *How To Be a Good Communist*, President of the State and for twenty years an acknowledged successor to Mao, disappeared in 1966. Liu Shaoqi was the Goldstein of China, accused of being a traitor, and an object of many hate-campaigns. The means of death in 1969 was never revealed. Lin Biao succeeded Liu to play the role of Goldstein. He rallied behind Mao in the purge of Liu, edited the Quotations of Chairman Mao, and was designated by Mao to be his successor. His succession was signed and sealed in the 1969 Constitution of the Communist Party of China. Then there came the uncovering of his plot against the B-52, a code-name Lin's son gave to the Chairman. Lin died in a planecrash when he attempted to escape in 1971. The complete turnabout in the campaigns from 'pro to con' or vice-versa was rather frequent at all levels of leadership.

In 1966 Liang Heng was just twelve years of age. When the Cultural Revolution started he observed all the 'struggles' with excitement. In Changsha, the provincial capital of Hunan, he was yearning to become a part of the Great Revolution. He recollects:

>It seemed that everyday good people were exposed as evil ones lurking behind Revolutionary masks. Friendly people were hidden serpents, Revolutionaries became counter-revolution- aries, and officials who usually rode cars to meetings might actually be murderers. It was confusing because the changes came so fast, and we used to joke with each other saying 'They dug somebody else up today', meaning that, as the newspapers like to put it, 'The telescope of Chairman Mao Thought has been used to enlarge our enemies and reveal them in their original states'. Still, most people felt that the Cultural Revolution was a wonderful thing, because when our enemies were uncovered China would be much more secure. So I felt excited and happy, and wished I could do something to help. 

Little Liang learned to 'doublethink'. His father was a good party member who divorced his mother because of her 'rightist' connection. An attack on his father by the Red Guards did not discourage him from wanting to become one of them. He joined the Rebels, travelled to Beijing, took the New Long March, went to the countryside, became a factory worker, learnt the secret of 'eating Socialism', fell in love with girls, elected to go to college in the post-Cultural Revolution period, married his American English teacher in 1980 and now lives happily in the United States. His Son of the Revolution is the most revealing account of life in China during the decade of turmoil, and an unusual document in every way. In spite of the estimate that hundreds of thousands of people were victimised in the Cultural Revolution, still a large number of the Chinese population survived. But Liang Heng is one of the very few who succeeded in speaking of their own involvement in the Revolution. Nine out of ten Chinese one talks to nowadays would tell you that he or she was a victim. One wonders whatever could have happened to the millions who threw their stones at the 'rightists' at one time and spat on the 'leftists' later. Perhaps they all have evaporated in the logic of doublethink. Perhaps it all becomes explicable in Newspeak: THE VILLAIN IS THE VICTIM!

The xenophobia and ultra-puritanism of *Nineteen Eighty-Four* was there, too. During the Cultural Revolution foreign embassies in Beijing were attacked and the slogan 'be prepared for the war' was followed by the digging of underground shelters in the capital. Chairman Mao predicted in 1966 that China would be involved in a war with the United States and the Soviet Union within two years. In 1967 the Chinese Minister of Foreign Affairs spoke of the possibility of war against either the United States or the Soviet Union. However, these threats were all tied to domestic politics. An American invasion would mean the revival of capitalism and a war against the Soviet Union would mean a fight against the revisionists. The war fever ran so high that it became fashionable for women to have short haircuts and wear the faded combat jacket of the old Liberation Army. 

The Cultural Revolution turned to an anarchic civil war after 1968 when the army was called in to restore order. Mao's theory of contradiction and the idea of ceaseless struggle turned everybody against everybody else. A romantic revolutionary Mao certainly was, but rational administrator he was not. To distill his ideal 100%-proof pure communists out of the 800 million people, hundreds of thousands had to be 'vapourised' and still many more in their millions had to be thrown away as the lees of the process. Mao, the Big Brother personified, relied on Lin Biao, his O'Brien, for the operation of Cultural Revolution. Unfortunately, in this instance, O'Brien himself wanted to become Big Brother. After the uncovering of Lin Biao's plot, Mao's 'Inner Party' began to crumble. The 'Gang of Four' hung on to the coat-tail of 'Big Brother' who began to show his senility.

Perhaps it was the ensuing confusion that made every one in China a victim of the Cultural Revolution. Deng Xiaoping, one of the most hated revisionists, a Goldstein, was twice purged and twice resurrected or 'rehabilitated'. The well-known joke about three men in jail asking each other about the reason of their being jailed is an example of the 'ups and downs' in those days. According to the joke the first one told the other he was there because he supported Deng. The second one said he was there because he opposed Deng. So they decided to ask the third person why he was imprisoned. The third man raised his head and said: 'I am Deng Xiaoping'. A wall-poster appeared in Canton in 1973 depicting the great repression following the summer of 1968 as follows:

>All across the land, there were arrests everywhere, suppression everywhere, miscarriages of justice everywhere . . . . Now there was no law and no heaven. This was a rehearsal of social fascism in our country. 

==So much for the similarities between life in the Oceania of *Nineteen Eighty-Four* and Mao's China in the late sixties. The behavioural similarities, however, conceal a fundamental difference between Orwell's political idea and Maoism. There is also a difference in the motivation and historical setting of the two dramas.== First, just like Orwellian scholars who impute all kinds of motives to the writing of *Nineteen Eighty-Four*, the many analyses of China's Cultural Revolution speculate about the reason why Mao launched the campaign. In contrast with Orwell who was 'sick and dispirited', Mao in 1966 was still 'healthy and spirited'. At the age of seventy-three Mao swam for an hour in the Yangtze River and commented: 'The current of the Yangtze is strong and there are many waves, but if a person is not afraid to struggle he will overcome all difficulties'. The whole nation was impressed by the Chairman's physical strength and was convinced of his deter- mination to carry on the revolution. Perhaps herein lies the difference between Orwell and Mao as builders of future worlds. ==While Orwell very likely wrote *Nineteen Eighty-Four* as a warning sounded by a disillusioned democratic socialist, Mao wrote his scenario of Cultural Revolution out of his everlasting zeal for revolution.==

Although disagreement between Mao and some of his old comrades was apparent by the mid-sixties, the Chairman was in no danger of losing his stature. However, Mao found himself that while he was personally enthroned as leader, his revolutionary method was being less and less applied in the daily operation of the state affairs. Things had become routinised. The party had become an establishment in itself; it had become the government. In 1959 Mao gave up the presidency of the state but retained the party chairmanship. In 1966 he found himself surrounded by comrades who were more concerned about stability than change. Everything was slipping back to non-revolutionary norms and 'economism' was claiming priority.

To interpret the Cultural Revolution in terms of a power struggle between Mao and his old comrades is an oversimplification of the matter. A Dutch diplomat who observed the event close at hand commented:

>The great difference between the Cultural Revolution and the Stalinist purges on the 1930s lies in the ideological aspect which in China played a principle role and in the Soviet Union a secondary one. Thus, in China, the active participation of the masses was made possible, whereas in the Soviet Union the purges were carried out by the secret police. 

The Cultural Revolution, from every information made available later, was really a revolution. Mao inspired the Red Guards, the workers and the masses to take the place of the party, the government, and whatever other social organisations and institutions there were.

There are other differences as well. Orwell's *Nineteen Eighty-Four* shows the Stalinist rule of terror by the secret police; but Mao's Cultural Revolution was mob-rule caused by his fantasy of populism. Unlike Orwell's Oceania where the mass remained as 'proles' who were left 'corrupted', Mao's China pinned its hope in the unlimited wisdom of common folks. Interestingly enough, Mao and Winston, the latter probably speaking for Orwell, saw the same light. 'If there is hope', writes Winston, 'it lies in the proles' (p. 216), and repeats this again and again (pp. 227, 230). If only they could somehow become conscious of their strength they could overthrow the party - a task impossible from within. On what Winston bases his hope is not clear, for in Oceania no attempt is made to inspire the proles with any ideology. ^ca1bd5

Thus, Winston's hope faded away as it faced the dilemma that 'until they [the proles] become conscious they will never rebel, and until after they have rebelled they cannot become conscious' (p. 217). This is where Mao and Winston part ways. For Mao everything is 'from the masses to the masses'. In a speech at the fifth mass rally in Beijing, Lin Biao, then still Mao's confidant, said:

>Under the guidance of Chairman Mao's correct line, the broad revolutionary masses of our country have created the new experience of developing extensive democracy . . . the Party is fearlessly permitting the broad masses to use the media to free airing of views, big character posters, great debates and extensive contacts, to criticize and supervise the Party and Government leading institutions and leaders at all levels. 

If Orwell's political pessimism in *Nineteen Eighty-Four* is a reflection of the feebleness and vulnerability of intellectual conviction, Mao's optimism in the Cultural Revolution must be an expression of firmness and certainty based upon his revolutionary experience. ^03425b

The difference in historical settings is rather obvious. The Oceania of *Nineteen Eighty-Four* is already a totalitarian society, or as Irving Howe puts it, 'might be called post totalitarian'. Exercise of power there, therefore, is to preserve the absolute rule of the Inner Party over all others. That absolute rule is to be perfected by control of mind, not merely of behaviour. ==The Cultural Revolution of Mao's China is a prelude to totalitarianism. Capturing of power by the mass was to destroy all practices and ways of life inconsistent with the Maoist ideology. Its ultimate goal was, as Hannah Arendt generalised for totalitarianism, 'to prove that its (the ideological) respective supersense has been right'.== In this instance, Mao wanted the Chinese reality to conform to his political and social fantasy. The way to totalitarianism and the preservation of totalitarianism, however, depended on the same process - 'a boot stamping on a human face' .

==One might wonder if the problem with the Chinese Cultural Revolution was not the actual personal existence of Big Brother. In Oceania no-one ever knows whether Big Brother truly exists. He is a symbol, as is Goldstein. One represents the absolute good and truth, and the other, evil and falsehood. They are the embodiment of the Party and its Enemy. In China, it was all too real and too secular. The Chairman appeared in person. He had a wife, nephew and relatives who all wielded power in the system. Worst of all, Mao's O'Brien - Lin Biao - also wanted to supplant Big Brother. Thus, there was a succession problem in China, a problem that Orwell avoided. In China the sincere response by the masses to the call of Big Brother was met by too many human failures on the part of Big Brother himself. For a totalitarian system to function smoothly, a Big Brother needs many 'middle' and 'small' Brothers who would abide by, but never challenge, the hierarchy of power.==

In this sense Orwell was a better political scientist for he knew the theory of organisation better than Mao. Mao wanted to rule directly over everybody, over everything and through all time. Where Mao failed most miserably was in his disregard of the need for professionalisation, especially in politics. In the midst of the Cultural Revolution a Western diplomat commented:

>Lin Piao and Mao Tse-tung were strangers to complex social structures. They feared any liberalisation and its accompanying social competition and complicated control methods and did not understand the demands of a modem economy. They did not understand the many-sidedness of society and the need of a bureaucracy. Their distaste expresses itself in a preoccupation with the common man, the one that can help himself, the eternal amateur . . . . Mao Tse-tung considered the Cultural Revolution necessary in order to restore the ideal of the common, proletarian man to its original glory.

Mao defied the old Confucian teaching that in a society some must labour with the mind and be fed by those who labour with the body. When Mao made everyone labour with the mind, the Chinese economy collapsed.

Finally, the greatest contrast lies between the ending of the two dramas. In Orwell's *Nineteen Eighty-Four* the hope is kept alive through the mouth of Winston: 'It is impossible to found a civilisation on fear and hatred and cruelty. It would never endure .... It would have no vitality. It would disintegrate. It would commit suicide', says Winston (p. 391). And, finally, it is the spirit of man that Orwell hopes would defeat his own nightmare. Yet in the end Orwell makes his hero succumb to the old Imperial Chinese way of torture. ==In the Chinese Cultural Revolution, ironical as this may sound, the rebel used the modern Western 'Jet plane ride' to extort confession and self-criticism from their victims.== In China it took ten years before the proles rebelled; but they overwhelmingly did. On 26 March 1976, at the same Tiananmen Square, where Big Brother had commissioned millions of young people to fight for his vision in 1966, millions of them now returned to show their defiance. As a Western reporter put it, it was a 'display of the ability of the human spirit to withstand long years of totalitarian rule and emerge strengthened'. The drama of *Nineteen Eighty-Four*, as it was enacted in China, ended with the final victory of Winston over O'Brien. The question, then, seems really to be one of the durability of human flesh, not human spirit.

Any comparison of Orwell's *Nineteen Eighty-Four* and Mao's Cultural Revolution suggests that control mechanisms designed by human beings against their fellow men are the same everywhere. It all entails attacks on human vulnerability along the lines of pain and pleasure. Orwell gave up on the proles from the outset, though with some reluctance. Mao abandoned the political professionals and turned to the proles. Winston Smith betrayed Orwell's hopes, as did Mao's proles by turning against him. They are all human beings of flesh and blood, but also possessing a soul. While individual flesh is mortal the soul of the collectivity transcends time. Had Orwell and Mao consulted each other they might have arrived at the simple political wisdom that you can fool some of the people some of the time but not all of the people all of the time. Totalitarianism cannot last forever as long as the human spirit exists, though it will triumph somewhere some of the time as long as our flesh is mortal.