# Protest Dialects: State Repression and South Korea's Democracy Movement 1970-1979 
#### Paul Y. Chang 
Tags: #Extract #Korea #EAS #History 

## Consolidating Authoritarianism  

The extraordinary measures codified in the Yusin Constitution marked a new era in South Korean political history. Although Syngman Rhee relied on ad hoc authoritarian tactics to exercise power, his government was organized within the parameters of a democratic system, however compromised, and it wasn’t until the Yusin Constitution that the structures for authoritarian rule were established. Central to this authoritarian structure was the expanded capacity for repression in the form of new political control laws. To better understand why the period between the implementation of the Yusin Constitution in 1972 to Park’s death in 1979 came to be known as the most repressive period in South Korea’s history (Lee 2006), it is important to appreciate the continuing evolution of Park Chung Hee’s rule.

After the Yusin Constitution installed the political structures that undergirded Park’s authoritarian government, the state relied on old and new repression strategies intended to control and discipline society. During the Yusin period (1972–1979), Park continued to rely on effective state organs, such as the military and the KCIA, while turning to new presidential Emergency Decrees to quell the emerging movement for democracy. These repressive structures constituted the backbone of Park Chung Hee’s regime, and the promulgation of the constitutional reforms was only the beginning of a process that Hak-Kyu Sohn has called the “consolidation of the Yushin system” (1989: 65). In short, Park’s new Yusin government continued to grow ever more repressive in response to the rising critical voices against it.

## REPRESSIVE STRUCTURES:  
## THE MILITARY, KCIA, AND POLITICAL CONTROL LAWS  

Ruud Koopmans (1997) provides a useful typology of state repression strategies that differentiates structural repression from situational repressive tactics. The former identifies the institutional mechanisms that limit political freedoms, which are broadly applicable to varied situations, while the latter constitutes the specific ways in which state organs deal with “on-the-ground” antistate protests (Chang and Vitale 2013). Although the two types of repression are related—for example, when new repressive laws justify police responses to public protests—Koopmans’s typology allows us to distinguish between the sources and applications of state repression. The coercive capacity of Park Chung Hee’s Yusin regime was significantly enhanced by repressive state organs that reflected the institutionalization of authoritarian power and were used to implement a far-reaching strategy of disciplining antigovernment groups in Korean society.

By the time Park Chung Hee rose to the rank of major general, the South Korean military constituted a powerful force in Korea. The primary catalyst for its growth was the Korean War (1950–1953), during which “Korean forces had increased from 65,000 to over 700,000 men” (Cole and Lyman 1971: 22). Even after Park Chung Hee retired from the military to run as a civilian in the 1963 presidential election, the armed forces were a continual source of support for him. Park turned to trusted military colleagues to staff key bureaucratic and political positions in his government, and in the 1971 National Assembly elections alone, retired generals accounted for 46.6 percent of Park’s DRP candidates (Kim J. H. 2011: 186). As Joo-Hong Kim notes, these “officers-turned-bureaucrats took on the role of a royal guard for the yushin regime within the state bureaucracy” (2011: 193).

In addition to providing Park with a pool of loyal supporters to work in his government, the military also played a central role in securing social stability during critical junctures throughout his tenure. Delegating his orders through the two key military control units, the Army Security Command (ASC) and the Capital Garrison Command (CGC), Park declared martial law five times during the 1960s and 1970s, and deployed military troops into the cities three different times after issuing garrison decrees (Kim J. H. 2011: 168, 171).1

Martial law, declared on June 3, 1964, and a garrison decree on August 26, 1965, stifled the contentious mobilization against the South Korea–Japan normalization treaty. Soon after, Park faced another cycle of protests following the constitutional amendment that allowed him to run for president a third time in 1971. Reacting to the large student protests that occurred before and after the 1971 presidential election, Park Chung Hee issued a second garrison decree on October 15 of that year. The military was deployed to universities where major demonstrations took place, and semipermanent quarters were established near campuses so that soldiers could quickly confront students in what were often violent exchanges. The 1971 garrison decree led to the arrest of more than a thousand students.

It wasn’t until the very end of his presidency, on October 20, 1979, that Park Chung Hee issued the third garrison decree. Preceded by another proclamation of martial law on October 18, the third garrison decree was Park’s response to the massive demonstrations that had erupted in the cities of Busan, Masan, and Changwon. Just six days after the garrison decree, however, Park Chung Hee was assassinated and the military, led by General Chun Doo Hwan, stepped in to restore order in the aftermath of Park’s unexpected death. Evidently, throughout Park’s rule (and after), the “armed forces served him both as the ultimate guarantor of political order in times of crisis and as a stable supplier of loyalists and supporters to man the key institutions of his political regime” (Kim J. H. 2011: 168).

Although the military played an important role at critical periods, Park Chung Hee relied most consistently and heavily on the KCIA to monitor society. The KCIA was created on June 19, 1961, by Park’s interim military administration under the leadership of Kim Chongp’il. Unlike its American counterpart, the KCIA was designed at the outset to coordinate both domestic and international intelligence gathering. Indeed, the KCIA monopolized almost all information on national security and even possessed considerable power over other segments of government, including the military’s ASC and CGC (Kim J. H. 2011: 168, 171). Designated the central state organ in Park’s strategy to defend South Korea from communist threats, the KCIA’s power to investigate individuals and organizations accused of antiregime activities was nearly unlimited.

The KCIA was led consecutively by a series of high-ranking military officers in the Republic of Korea Army who were personally loyal to Park Chung Hee: Kim Chongp’il (KCIA director from 1961–1963, one-star brigadier general, and main architect of the 1961 coup), Kim Hyŏnguk (1963–1969, one-star brigadier general), Yi Hurak (1970–1973, two-star major general), Sin Chiksu (1973–1976, major general), and Kim Chaegyu (1976–1979, three-star lieutenant general).2 Because the KCIA occupied a central position in the repressive apparatus of the Yusin system, its directors were granted privileged access to Park Chung Hee and, according to Byung-Kook Kim, could “knock on his door anytime day or night, if necessary” (2011b: 147).

The KCIA exercised extraordinary powers and its activities often went beyond legally defined objectives and jurisdiction. In 1968, for example, KCIA agents kidnapped Korean citizens living in West Germany and brought them back to South Korea to charge them with violating Korea’s National Security Law (NSL). This incident set a precedent for the 1973 kidnapping in Tokyo, Japan, of Kim Dae Jung, the main opposition candidate against Park Chung Hee in the 1971 presidential election. In addition to carrying out the kidnappings, the KCIA also spearheaded one of the boldest attempts to influence a foreign government: in what became known as the 1976 “Koreagate” scandal, KCIA agents illegally lobbied and bribed U.S. congressmen in an effort to win favors for the Korean government. Although Koreagate was a debacle for Park Chung Hee’s government, leading to the defection of some key KCIA agents and strained relations with the United States, the incident reflected the incredible scope of KCIA programs. During the Park Chung Hee era, as Byung-Kook Kim puts it, “behind every major political plot stood the KCIA” (2011b: 155).

International escapades notwithstanding, the KCIA was most effective when surveilling domestic actors who represented threats to Park Chung Hee’s rule. The sources of that threat, whether institutional politicians or dissident students, did not matter. So many dissidents were taken to be interrogated at the KCIA facility in the Seobinggo district, at the foot of South Mountain (Namsan) in central Seoul, that activists would joke that they were checking into the “Seobinggo Hotel VIP room.” The euphemism belies the terror the KCIA represented as it frequently spied on, harassed, investigated, detained, and tortured participants in the democracy movement. The KCIA was responsible for the most egregious human rights violations in the 1970s, including the People’s Revolutionary Party case discussed in Chapter 3. It was, simply put, the most feared and despised institution during the Park Chung Hee era.

In addition to relying on repressive organs such as the military and the KCIA, Park Chung Hee’s Yusin regime also enacted “political control laws” (chŏngch’i kyujepŏp). The two most notorious of these were the NSL and the Anti-Communist Law (ACL). Based on the Law for the Maintenance of Public Security, which was in effect during the Japanese colonial period (1910– 1945), the NSL was created in 1948 by the First Republic of South Korea under Syngman Rhee to “restrict antistate acts that endanger national security and to protect the nation’s safety and its people’s lives and freedom” (Kukka Inkwŏn Wiwŏnhoe 2002). The NSL targeted individuals who the government believed were communists or sympathizers of the communist regime in North Korea, but it was also freely used to arrest and incarcerate dissidents who mobilized for a democratic South Korea. For those in the democracy movement, the NSL was a salient symbol of state structural repression.

To further strengthen the state’s ability to suppress communist elements in South Korea, Park Chung Hee’s interim military administration passed the ACL on July 3, 1961, immediately after his coup d’état. Although the ACL “overlapped the National Security Law in many respects . . . [it] permitted a very wide interpretation of socialism, and thus, even more than the National Security Law, could restrict academic freedom, freedom of thought and conscience, and the freedom of political and social activities” (Seo 2007: 135). Throughout the 1970s, the NSL and the ACL served as legal tools for arresting and prosecuting antigovernment dissidents.6 A comprehensive study of the government’s use of the NSL and other political control laws—conducted by the National Human Rights Commission of Korea (Kukka Inkwŏn Wiwŏnhoe) and cosponsored by the Association of Family Members of Democracy Movement Practitioners (Minjuhwa Silch’ŏn Kajok Undong Hyŏbŭihoe)—showed that from 1970 to 1979, 1,229 and 3,082 individuals were arrested under the NSL and ACL, respectively (Kukka Inkwŏn Wiwŏnhoe 2002: 23).

## CONSOLIDATING AUTHORITARIANISM: THE EMERGENCY DECREES
As Park Chung Hee’s Yusin regime framed dissidents as communists and arrested them under the NSL and the ACL, it continued to promulgate new laws to address specific situations as they arose. The power to enact emergency measures “for the maintenance of ‘national security’ and ‘public peace and order’” was stipulated in Article 53 of the Yusin Constitution (Kim J. H. 2011: 188). These presidential Emergency Decrees (EDs; kin’gŭp choch’i) were ad hoc laws that did not need the approval of the National Assembly and, even more than the NSL and ACL, came to symbolize the repressive capacity of Park’s government. Indeed, the EDs were such a salient component of the Yusin system that the 1970s is sometimes referred to as the “ED era” (kin’gŭp choch’i sidae). As scholars have pointed out, Park Chung Hee’s first use of the EDs in the mid-1970s reflected a noticeable change in his style of leadership toward more heavy-handed repression, which in turn corresponded to significant political and personal events.

Along with the growing domestic democracy movement, the most important event during this time was America’s exit from the Vietnam War beginning in 1973 and culminating in the fall of Saigon in 1975. The defeat of the United States and the victory of communism in Vietnam weighed heavy on the minds of all South Koreans, who, having experienced their own civil war, knew better than most the consequences of communist aggression. In addition to the everpresent security threat posed by North Korea and the shock of Vietnam, Park Chung Hee also experienced a deep personal loss when a Japan-born Korean, in sympathy with North Korea, attempted to murder Park but instead killed Park’s wife, Yuk Yŏngsu, on August 15, 1974. According to Byung-Kook Kim, following the death of his wife, “Park lost his acumen, vigilance, and discipline, became frequently fatigued with work, and withdrew ever more into his deeply introverted personality” (2011b: 165).

The promulgation of the first two EDs marked the beginning of the process of consolidating Park Chung Hee’s authoritarian control over society. Criticisms of his Yusin Constitution surfaced almost immediately after it was announced in October 1972. On December 24, 1972, Chang Chunha, founding editor of the influential Sasangge Monthly, and several prominent leaders in the progressive community began a no-confidence campaign against the constitutional reforms in the form of a “one-million signature” drive (Seo 2007: 190). Chang’s stature as a leading public intellectual helped to popularize this conspicuous challenge to Park’s government. The no-confidence signature campaign, mostly organized by high-profile intellectuals and religious leaders, continued through 1973, when it was buttressed by the reemergence of large student demonstrations starting in October. By the end of 1973, Park Chung Hee faced threats on multiple fronts, which motivated his government to enact the first two EDs.

ED 1, issued on January 8, 1974, disallowed criticism of the Yusin Constitution generally, and forbade antigovernment petition drives specifically. ED 2, promulgated on the same day, designated the General Emergency Martial Court to process cases of individuals arrested under the first ED, a move that gave Park Chung Hee greater control over the judicial process. Central figures in the signature campaign, including prominent novelist Lee Ho-Chul8 (interview with Lee Ho-Chul, December 16, 2004), were arrested for violating ED 1. Clearly, the first two EDs were a direct response to the no-confidence petition drive and the reemergence of student protests.

Student demonstrations did not subside after EDs 1 and 2. Instead they grew in size and scope through the winter of 1973 and spring of 1974. As detailed in Chapter 3, student leaders made a concerted effort to establish a national front by creating networks among schools in different regions of the country. Pursuing a preemptive strategy, Park Chung Hee issued ED 4 on April 3, 1974, the same day that students across the country were to hold the largest nationwide day of protest since the establishment of the Yusin government. ED 4 criminalized student political organizing and allowed “the KCIA, ASC, and CGC’s military police to launch wholesale arrests of student activists” (Kim J. H. 2011: 192). In addition, to break the organizational foundations of the student movement, ED 4 illegalized the National Democratic Youth and Student Alliance and detailed a list of punishments for anyone who was involved in or supported this nationwide network of student activists. The mass arrest of student protesters following ED 4, and the forced closure of Korea University—a hotbed of activism—following ED 7 on April 8, 1975, crippled the student movement in the latter half of the 1970s.

The demobilization of the student movement after ED 4 became a catalyst for the politicization of new social movement actors. The severity of the repression of students alarmed many segments of Korean society as stories of torture spread through dissident networks. New groups joined the democracy movement, including progressive Christians, who emerged as the most active community engaged in public protests after ED 4 effectively stopped students from demonstrating. Additionally, as discussed in Chapter 5, state repression facilitated the politicization of journalists and lawyers who joined the democracy movement after the state censored newspapers sympathetic to the student movement and threatened lawyers who defended students arrested under the EDs.

Compounding the difficulty of facing an evolving constellation of antigovernment forces were, as mentioned earlier, significant developments in international politics, including most crucially the fall of Saigon in April 1975. ED 9, declared on May 13, 1975, was the broadly applicable answer to both the domestic and the international challenges that Park Chung Hee confronted. Among other things, ED 9 illegalized the spreading of “groundless rumors” about the government, debating the Yusin Constitution, collectively mobilizing against the government, and criticizing ED 9 itself. In essence, with its intentional vagueness, ED 9 “combined all of the past EDs into one law” and “even one wrong word could land you in jail” (Minjuhwa Undong Kinyŏm Saŏphoe 2006).10

The unique content and purpose of the various EDs are indicators of the relatively tight coupling between specific mobilization efforts and the government’s responses to them. If the purpose of ED 1 was to discourage a particular protest tactic—the petition drive—EDs 4 and 7 were more thorough as they targeted an entire segment of the democracy movement—student activists. ED 9 represented the culmination of the ED strategy and its wide applicability was a logical response to the diversification of the democracy movement. “Legally” justified by the EDs, the government significantly expanded its capacity for repressing dissident movements through various coercive tactics, including arrest, torture, and murder. In short, the antigovernment mobilization efforts of various dissident communities “influenced the forms and extent of state repression” (Yi 2011: 279), which in turn led to the further consolidation of authoritarianism in the 1970s.

## Situational Repression Tactics 
Legally backed by the NSL, ACL, and EDs, Park Chung Hee utilized the military, the KCIA, and the national police to suppress antigovernment protesters. The Yusin regime relied on a wide assortment of repressive actions, ranging from fairly mild tactics, such as threatening or criticizing dissidents, to extreme repression, including violence, torture, and execution. Table 2.1 summarizes the repression tactics of the Yusin regime as recorded in the Stanford KDP Events Dataset. Often the state would deploy riot police to demonstrations, sit-in rallies, employee strikes, and public declarations. The most common repression tactic used at protest sites was to arrest participants, which was often accompanied by violence. In addition to arrests and the use of violence, the state also relied on containment tactics, spoken threat, and interrogation, as well as several other strategies.

The Yusin regime strategically employed tactics tailored to specific social groups participating in the democracy movement. It often supported employers when they fired workers who attempted to organize democratic unions and fight for better working conditions. The state intervened directly in employer-worker disputes by deploying police to subdue labor strikes, at times shutting down factories altogether. Censorship was a repression tactic uniquely applied to journalists and others working in print media, such as writers and academics. Student mobilization, by contrast, was dealt with by temporarily stopping classes or closing schools and universities in order to limit students’ ability to gather in large numbers. Deportation, another disciplinary measure, targeted foreigners who participated in the democracy movement. As Table 2.1 shows, the government often combined generally applicable repression tactics with more specific strategies to address different segments of the dissident community.