# The Miracle with a Dark Side: Korean Economic Development under Park Chung-hee 
Tags: #Extract #Korea #EAS #History 

## Prologue to the Miracle 

South Korea came into being as the result of the partition of what had been, prior to the early twentieth century, the ancient kingdom of Chosun. This partition into a communist North and a noncommunist South occurred shortly after the defeat of Japan in World War II in late 1945. Korea had been involuntarily absorbed into Japan in 1910, following more than a decade of Japanese domination after the slow collapse of the long-lasting but static Yi dynasty of Chosun. This dynasty had ruled Korea for more than half a millennium, from 1392 until 1910, but to a large extent as a vassal of Chinese rulers, first to the Ming dynasty and later to the Qing dynasty. From 1910 until 1945, Korea was effectively a colony of Japan. 

==During this period, though some might argue that Japan helped to lay the foundations for future Korean economic development, many Koreans experienced absolute declines in standard of living; and almost all detested the Japanese dominance (Mason et al. 1980).== During the 1930s, as the Korean people and Korean resources were increasingly mobilized to serve Japanese war preparations, this detestation deepened. Thus, the liberation of Korea from Japan in 1945 should have occasioned joy among the Korean people–and, for 
a few months at least, it did. But alas, Korea quickly became a focal point of the rivalry between the United States and the Soviet Union, which had emerged from their rather tense alliance to defeat the Axis powers during World War II as opposing superpowers.
During 1946 to 1948, the United States and the Soviet Union each tried to create a government in Korea to its liking, but neither was able to rally a majority of Koreans around its favored candidate for national leader. These were the right-leaning nationalist Syngman Rhee, supported by the United States (and by right-wing Koreans, many of whom had cooperated with the Japanese), and the Communist Kim Il-sung, supported by the Soviet Union. By 1947, it was clear that the majority of the people in the south were not particularly sympathetic to the Communist cause, despite their lack of enthusiasm for the right-wing elements so strongly supported by the Americans. At the same time, during 1946 and 1947 Kim II-sung and Kim Tu-bong worked with Soviet troops occupying the north to build a strong Communist Party, formally called the Korean Workers' Party, out of what had been the resistance movement. The Communists quickly acted to eliminate moderate and rightwing elements and to establish the Korean Workers' Party as the effective governing organization in the north. To resolve an impasse that was created by the north being effectively governed by Communists and the south by rightists, a formal partition at the 38th parallel–meant to be temporary–was agreed on in 1948.

At the time of the partition, the south was the poorer of the two newly created Korean states, and its poverty was compounded by the arrival of refugees from the north. During the first years of its existence, moreover, almost everything went downhill in South Korea. Although its fledgling government was created as a democracy, the first election in 1948, which elected Syngman Rhee as president, was boycotted by leftists and hence lacked legitimacy in the eyes of many Koreans (and, indeed, many international observers). Rhee, although born in Korea, had spent most of his life on US soil. He held degrees from George Washington, Harvard, and Princeton Universities, and from 1919 until 1941, to the annoyance of Japan, he had been head of a self-proclaimed Korean government-inexile based in Hawaii that captured the admiration of many Koreans at home. But by 1948, his support in Korea was waning, and what support he had came largely from those elements of Korean society that had collaborated with the Japanese.

In June 1950, South Korea was invaded by North Korea. In the ensuing war, the early victories went to North Korea, whose armies overran most of the territory of the South within months (for a detailed analysis, see Hastings 1987). Only the intervention of UN troops, composed mostly but not entirely of US forces, kept the South from yielding completely. They at first were unable to repulse the northern invaders. Only the southeastern Korean port city of Pusan did not fall to the North Koreans. But UN forces under US General Douglas MacArthur then launched a successful amphibious landing at Inchon, near Seoul, effectively cutting the northern army in half. The UN forces then pushed the North Koreans back to the border with China, overrunning in turn virtually all of the territory of the North. But North Korea itself was saved by outside intervention: Chinese forces, in a bold winter offensive, drove the UN back south. A stalemate ensued until 1953, when active hostilities were concluded with an armistice that left the Korean states legally at war with each other but de facto at peace and separated by a narrow no-man’s-land at the 38th parallel, barely 50 kilometers from Seoul.

Before the war the Communist movement held some appeal to at least a substantial minority or South Korea's population, but the savagery of the North Korean army during its brief occupation of South Korea caused most of its supporters to change their minds. Thus, ==by the end of the war a much larger majority of the South Korean people was resolved not to be governed by the North.== A leftist (and, at times, vocal) minority did remain, but it was small. Under these circumstances, in 1956, although the economy of South Korea was largely still in ruins, Rhee handily won reelection to the presidency as the man who had pushed back the North Korean invasion.

South Korea nonetheless remained a poor and largely underdeveloped nation for more than a decade after the war concluded. Large amounts of US aid enabled South Korea both to maintain its military and to keep its population from starving, but one intended goal of the aid, to create a light industrial base, went largely unrealized. ==One reason was widespread corruption: a significant amount of the aid was appropriated for private use, thereby creating a new class of wealthy Koreans and failing to reach the rank-and-file Korean people for whom it was intended.== Some of these newly wealthy Koreans went on to found several of the large chaebol that were to become the backbone of the later Korean economic miracle (Jones and SaKong 1980). But the fact that they had, in the eyes of many of their fellow Koreans, obtained their initial wealth illicitly was to taint their many later accomplishments.

Another related reason for the lack of economic development was that the government encouraged import-substitution policies. Such policies were attempted in much of the developing world, usually without creating significant economic growth. ==But they often did succeed in creating a class of wealthy entrepreneurs with a vested interest in keeping the failed policies in place.== By the late 1950s, such a class existed in Korea. In addition, US policy, prompted by protectionist sentiment in the US Congress, was deliberately to discourage those Korean firms that might have become successful exporters from selling outside of Korea, especially in the textile industry. This is an issue discussed in more detail below.

Although Syngman Rhee again won reelection in 1960, popular dissatisfaction with both extensive election fraud and the poor state of the economy was widespread. In particular, most Koreans believed that cronies of Rhee were beneficiaries of corrupt government practices. Student riots erupted in April of that year, and during their suppression by Korean police at least 142 students died. ==This calamity in turn led to widespread calls for Rhee's resignation.== The US government took the unusual step of issuing a statement that recognized the “legitimate grievances” of the Korean people. The Korean military subsequently let Rhee know that it too sided with the protesters.

Thus, confronted both with intense domestic pressure to resign and with loss of support from the United States, Rhee chose to step down. An interim government headed by Chung Huh was formed until elections could be held. Chang My-on (known in the United States as John Chang) was then elected prime minister and Yun Po-sun president. Chang initiated a series of major liberalizing economic reforms designed to reverse the economic stagnation. Unfortunately, the economy did not respond quickly to these reforms, and popular unrest, rather than subsiding after the resignation Rhee, actually grew.

## Military Coup, and the Miracle Begins 
In the face of growing economic and social instability, the Korean military seized power in 1961, effectively ending any pretext of democracy in South Korea. Although many democratic trappings would remain in place, largely at the insistence of the United States (which constantly pressured the Korean government to permit more democracy throughout the period of military leadership), for more than thirty years ==Korea would effectively be under authoritarian military rule. It was under this rule that the “economic miracle” took shape==.

The main organizer of the military coup was Kim Jong-pil, a young lieutenant colonel. But when the military actually took over the government, the leader who emerged was a more senior officer, Major General [[Park Chung Hee|Park Chung-hee]]. Park had been a junior officer in the Japanese army during the 1930s and 1940s, and he was strongly influenced by a doctrine–widely held by the Japanese military during that period (Clifford 1994)–==characterized by a belief in strong, centralized management of the economy and by a strong nationalism.== The first of these beliefs was almost Marxist in its stress on the extent to which the state should engage in centralized planning of the economy; indeed, when Park first took control in Korea, the Kennedy administration in the United States worried that he might be a “closet Communist.” However, the second element of this doctrine–intense nationalism–included complete rejection of international communism and the dominance of the Soviet Union in that movement. Park thus in fact proved to be something of an enigma: an intense Korean nationalist who had fought for the Japanese, who believed in the ==primacy of state power in economics, but who oversaw the creation of what were to become very large, privately owned industrial groups.==

Park ruled by fiat for the next two and a half years; he then narrowly won an election held largely at the behest of the United States. He also won reelection in 1967 and again, narrowly, in 1971. In the 1971 election he faced strong opposition from a young firebrand, Kim Dae-jung, who is president of Korea at the time of this writing. Most observers believe that Kim might have won the earlier election had it been truly free. Shaken by nearly being bounced from power, Park ended any pretext of democracy; and from 1972 until his assassination by one of his own protégés in 1979, he ruled effectively as a dictator under the revamped “Yushin” constitution that made him president for life.

Park thus will be remembered by history for a number of reasons, many of them unfavorable. He effectively suppressed dissent in Korea, in the early years by relatively moderate means but with increasing harshness following 1972. Indeed, after 1972 he actively suppressed democracy. ==But he also placed the highest priority on improving the Korean economy, something that Syngman Rhee had not done.== And, almost without question, with the help of a number of very able advisors, Park created what was to become the Korean economic miracle. For this reason, he enjoyed a large measure of popular support by the Korean people until the final years of his rule. ==Indeed, one reason why the United States, after a period of hand-wringing, recognized the new regime was that the Korean people themselves accepted it==. Furthermore, the elections of 1963 and 1967 were legitimately won by Park; there is little evidence that they were rigged. The worst that can be said is that no really effective opposition existed in either year and that Park's government did its best to prevent one from arising (the opposition was to become better organized and much more effective in the 1970s).

One step toward preventing dissent was the founding in 1961 of the Korean Central Intelligence Agency (KCIA), whose first head was Kim Jong-pil, the young officer who had initially led the coup. The mission of the KCIA was as much to keep tabs on potential opposition to the government within South Korea as to gather information about external threats (mostly, of course, from North Korea). Given that North Korea did have agents provocateurs operating in South Korea, the link between the threat from the North and domestic opposition in the South was not fatuous. ==However, all too often, when dissidence arose in the South that was entirely legitimate and almost surely not instigated from the North, it was treated by the KCIA as though it were purely a product of North Korean provocation.==

Though political agencies in the early Park regime were dominated by the military, economic agencies generally were not. Rather, under Park the status of economics experts in the Korean government rose considerably. One of Park's first acts was to elevate the status of economic planning in Korea, placing civilian experts in charge of it. In 1961 he created the Economic Planning Board (EPB), whose head was made deputy prime minister. ==In spite of the political title and high level of this position, Park insisted that it be filled by a person with superb technical qualifications rather than a political figure or a high-ranking member of the military.== In 1962, the EPB introduced the first of what was to become a series of five-year plans for Korea's development. State-owned banks were created to help implement the government's development plans, and laws were passed to force private banks effectively also to become agents of their implementation. Over the next years, the Korean government became, in the words of former EPB member and Deputy Prime Minister SaKong, an “entrepreneur-manager” (SaKong 1993, 27). During the first and second five-year plans, the government itself was involved in industrial undertakings. In the 1960s, more than one-third of government expenditures were for investment, and public investment accounted for close to a third of all fixed capital formation. ==Thus, between 1963 and 1977, public enterprises in Korea grew at an annual rate of 10 percent and the share of these enterprises in GDP grew from slightly over 6 percent in 1963 to more than 9 percent in 1980 (SaKong 1993, table 3.4).== Korea did not consider itself to be a socialist nation but, as SaKong points out, as recently as 1980 the output share of public enterprises in the GDP in Korea was as high as in a number of nations “with socialist intentions,” such as India or Pakistan. This emphasis reflected Park's own philosophy, under which the state was meant to be the dominant agent in the economy. 

However, as the Park years progressed, the Korean government's role as “entrepreneur-manager” increasingly was manifested not so much in public enterprises, as important as these were, but rather in the government's direction of activities undertaken by the surging private sector. ==At its core was a policy of subsidizing those private enterprises that were able to achieve increasingly higher levels of export or of substituting domestic production for imports.== The subsidies largely took the form of preferential access either to foreign credit or to credit extended by domestic Korean banks. The former was especially important during the early Park years, when domestic Korean savings were low, while the latter become increasingly important during the heavy and chemical industries drive of the 1970s, the topic of the following section. 

Some Koreans, at least, tend to see the export orientation of the early Park strategy as the product of pure genius. Though the role of strategic planning cannot be ruled out, ==it must be recognized that the first five-year plan encouraged both exportation and import substitution (local manufacture of goods that were imported), without explicitly favoring either==. Indeed, in the early 1960s, development strategies calling for import substitution were much in vogue among developing nations. Many economists advocated them despite their obvious flaw: such a strategy calls for allocating resources into activities for which the affected nation has revealed comparative disadvantage. The classical argument for the gains from trade are based on precisely the opposite approach–that resources should shift, as the result of trade opening, into those activities for which that nation enjoys comparative advantage. In the 1960s, the answer given to this obvious problem was that developing nations might have unrealized comparative advantage in certain sectors that could be exploited if only the right activities could be identified and nurtured.

During such a period of nurture, defenders of these strategies argued, it might be appropriate to grant so-called infant-industry protection from imports. The idea was that the “infants” would grow into robust and healthy “adults” and thus, over time, activities that initially had required protection from imports would transform into being capable of themselves successfully exporting. Whether or not infant-industry protection actually makes practical sense is a question hotly debated among development economists. There are strong arguments against its logic: for example, this protection is likely to promote the development of activities for which no transformation into “adulthood” ever takes place, leaving them perpetually inefficient. ==Nonetheless, in the first five-year plan, infant-industry protection was one route Korea chose to take, and it arguably had some degree of success. Indeed, the case of Korea is often cited by proponents of infant-industry protection as evidence that this policy can work.== As Korean planners recognized in the early 1960s, if one accepts the logic of infant-industry protection, one faces the significant problem in choosing the right activities—that is, those in which latent comparative advantage does exist. If the choice is incorrect, a protected infant industry might remain an infant indefinitely, requiring state aid in the form of continuing subsidies or protection simply to survive and never prospering. Indeed, the accumulated experience of many countries that have pursued import-substitution policies has been that infants nursed under these policies never grow into robust adults (Noland and Pack 2003). Rather, they can become voracious infants, consuming vast resources that might otherwise be allocated to more robust activities and thereby retarding development. ==Furthermore, such “fat infants” typically create significant constituencies for the continuance of state aid, notably in the considerable numbers of workers that they employ. And even if the enterprises never earn acceptable returns on capital invested, their subsidies often make major shareholders wealthy enough to become major contributors to political parties. Thus, these constituencies often can effectively “capture” public policy so as to ensure that the aid is not cut off.== 

==Recognizing these likely pitfalls, Korean planners who worked under Park during the early years developed two unwritten policies. First, export expansion rather than import substitution received higher priority. Thus, those infants given the most nurturance by the state were those that delivered increased exports. Second, complementing the first policy, activities that did not produce the desired result of increased exports were allowed to fail, often with ruthless speed.== The unwritten rule in Korea became, in effect, that an entrepreneur who got in tight with the government could become rich, but only if that entrepreneur's export performance was outstanding. By contrast, in many other developing countries, only a close relationship with the government was necessary. These unwritten policies are evidenced by the export data: ==although they had accounted for less than 5 percent of Korean GDP at the end of the 1950s, exports had risen to more than 35 percent of a much larger GDP by 1980==. Such growth would likely have been impossible had Koreans simply attempted to increase exports of only those goods that were already being exported. Rather, under the unwritten rules, Korean entrepreneurs either took those risks required to succeed in building new areas of comparative advantage for Korea or failed to receive the preferences that were available to firms that met export goals. Under these policies, infants that failed to export were unlikely to achieve capture of government policy—though, as we shall see, the Korean record in this regard was not entirely unblemished. 

==The antecedents of what became the chaebol, for the most part, were those firms that succeeded under the policies of Park during the 1960s. In fact, as already noted, the entrepreneurs who built these groups often were already quite wealthy by virtue of activities undertaken during the overtly corrupt Rhee years. But many of these same entrepreneurs also succeeded in enlarging their business during the early Park years under policies that demanded performance rather than cronyism.== 

The instilling of export-oriented values in established companies was facilitated by one of Park's first acts: with great theatrics, in 1962 he went after wealthy Koreans who, in his eyes, had illicitly accumulated wealth during the Syngman Rhee period (Jones and SaKong 1980). Most such persons were not subjected to criminal prosecution, as they might have been under laws hastily passed by the Park regime, but rather were forced to pledge to work to build a new Korean economy. Lee Byungchol of Samsung, then the wealthiest person in Korea, went so far as to pledge to give his entire fortune to the Korean government, and eight other wealthy businessmen followed suit. None of them actually ever did so, though Lee donated land on which he had built a golf course south of the city of Seoul for the construction of a new campus for Seoul National University. What was eventually required of Korea's business leaders was to establish successful operations in new sectors and activities selected by the government. They were obligated in principle to give shares in these new firms to the government (ostensibly to pay back the illicit component of their wealth to the Korean people), but such payments were rarely made. ==What Park's theatrics succeeded in doing was both to frighten existing wealthy entrepreneurs and to demonstrate that if they played by the new rules that Park set, they could do well under the new regime.== 

In its first years, the EPB recommended abolishing the multiple exchange rate system that had been in use during the 1950s, under which the Korean currency was persistently overvalued, and replacing multiple rates with a single exchange value for the Korean won that was consistent with export competitiveness. Implementation of this reform proceeded by fits and starts. A unitary fixed rate was introduced in 1961 under which the won was effectively devalued twice against the dollar, but multiple rates were reintroduced in 1963. In 1965 a fluctuating unitary rate was introduced. At the recommendation of the EPB, the Korean government began to ease or remove many import restrictions after 1962, in particular easing or eliminating restrictions on imports of goods or services needed as inputs to exports. 

First to benefit from the new policies and engage in export-led development in Korea was the textile and apparel sector. The cotton textile spinning and weaving industry had engaged, as in many countries, the first “modern” industry in Korea even prior to the Park years; indeed, one firm in this sector, Kyongsong Spinning and Weaving, was an important exception to the rule that Korean entrepreneurs did not flourish under Japanese occupation. Kyongsong was founded in 1919 and had become a major firm before liberation (Amsden 1989). During the 1950s, other firms had entered this sector; by the time of Park's coup d'état, about 15 Korean firms were engaged in cotton spinning and weaving. Despite their number, there was little competition in this sector, for these firms had created a formal cartel. This action was taken partly in response to their having received subsidized loans offered through US aid programs during the 1950s. One condition of the loans was that the recipients not export output to the United States (thus beginning a long tradition by which the US government would lecture Koreans on the virtues of open markets while keeping domestic US markets partly closed to Korean exports). Faced with overcapacity relative to domestic demand, the firms had formed what amounted to a cartel to allocate production quotas. By international standards, labor productivity in this sector was high. 

The 1961 devaluations initially hurt the textile firms because they depended on imported cotton and thus had to raise prices of finished goods to pay for the imported input. The instinct of the firms was therefore to seek won revaluation, but the EPB convinced Park that devaluation was ultimately in Korea's best interests. Domestic demand for cotton textile products responded negatively to the higher prices, as would be expected, and even more capacity became idle. The obvious answer to the overcapacity problem facing the industry, and indeed what the EPB sought, was that Korean textile firms begin to export at least some of their output. Were they to do so, the won devaluations would have made Korean products more export competitive. However, a number of obstacles stood in the way. Besides the US policy, just noted, Korean firms simply had not established links with international distributors and other agents necessary to obtain export business. 

Park's response, guided by the EPB, was to use a “carrot and stick” approach to encourage these firms to export. As carrots, a large variety of subsidies and other incentives were offered to textile firms—preferential loans conditional upon exporting, tax exemptions (including tariff exemptions for imported inputs), and other measures. Citing Woo K.D. (1978), Alice Amsden (1989, 68) notes that these subsidies were necessary to enable the Korean firms to compete against more-established Japanese exporters, which had noncost incumbency advantages (e.g., established relations with international wholesalers and distributors of textiles and textile products). In terms of comparative advantage, Korean textiles should have been internationally competitive with the Japanese product, and thus perhaps temporary subsidies to offset incumbency advantages held by Japanese firms were warranted. Indeed, their experience in the textile sector taught the Koreans that more than price competitiveness was needed to develop export markets; nonprice incumbency advantages of other producers also had to be identified and overcome. 

This approach produced results. In 1961 textiles accounted for about 25 percent of Korean exports totaling $5.7 million. In 1965, four years later, total exports had risen to more than $106 million, of which textiles made up 41 percent. Firms that would eventually become the largest of the chaebol figured in this dramatic growth. For example, one of the star performers was the Cheil Wool Textile Company, founded in 1954 by Lee Byung-chol—who was, as noted above, one of the businessman cited for corruption by Park in 1963. Cheil became the leading industrial firm in the emergent Samsung group. The name “Samsung” comes from a trading company founded by Lee in 1948, from which Lee made his early fortune deemed “illicit” by Park. 

The third largest of the chaebol at the time of the 1997 financial crisis, Daewoo, also began its life in 1967 as a trading company whose major business was the export of textiles and apparel. Specifically, Daewoo rose because it was able to obtain export quota rights to the United States when the United States began to sharply restrict imports of apparel. In the early years, Daewoo's business consisted mostly of selling the right to export clothing to the United States to other firms; its business was simply to collect (to use the economists' term) the rents that accrued to those rights. Over the period 1967-76, Daewoo's exports grew at an annual compound rate of 122 percent. This business was so lucrative that the quota rights were eventually placed in a firm separate from the rest of the group; its sole function was to enrich the original owners but bypass new minority shareholders. But by 1968 Daewoo was engaged in the manufacture as well as the trading of textiles. 

Although the export performance of the textile industry and of certain other light industries (e.g., footwear) created the first major spurt of growth of the Korean economy, the development of such industries was not really what Park had in mind for Korea. Rather, he dreamed of a time when Korea would be a major international producer of such products as steel, ships, heavy vehicles, and heavy machinery—products that Park associated Wlth national strength (an association that dated to Park's years with the Japanese military). During the 1960s, however, the EPB was of a somewhat different mind-set. The EPB experts were all trained (or at least well read) in economics, and they emphasized to Park that if Korea were to succeed as an exporting nation, the government should continue to develop industries in which the Korean economy had at least latent comparative advantage. These, according to the EPB, were in light manufacturing. The EPB agreed with Park that more capital-intensive industries might be built over time, but disagreed that an attempt to develop them should be made early on. ==Thus, as the EPB prepared a succession of five-year plans for the Korean economy, the experts stressed comparative advantage, while Park continued to push in the direction of heavy industries.== 

For a time, the EPB held sway. One reason was that the very success of the textile sector in establishing itself as a major exporter served during the 1960s to hold in check Park's ambitions in heavy industry. In addition, the growth of new heavy sectors would require very high rates of capital formation, whose financing in turn necessitates that a nation either generate domestic savings or import large amounts of capital from abroad. During the 1950s, net domestic savings in Korea were close to zero, with the result that capital formation had to be largely financed from abroad (mostly in the form of concessional aid), and this situation was inherited by Park. Consequently, to finance sizable capital formation in the early Park years, Korean firms largely had to look overseas, and the availability of this financing was limited. Foreign lenders simply were unwilling to lend money to build steel mills or shipyards to Korean firms with little or no experience in the heavy industries. For example, whereas the first five-year plan, at Park's insistence, called for the development of an integrated iron and steel complex in Korea, the World Bank nixed that idea. ==Thus, Korean dependence on foreign finance initially played into the hands of the EPB and constrained Park's ambitions.== 

Dependence on foreign finance did, however, give the government a potentially powerful method for guiding economic activity, which was to control credit extended by foreign lenders to Korean enterprises by acting as guarantor of that credit. The Park government was very quick to recognize this potential. In 1962, the Foreign Capital Inducement Deliberation Committee was formed within the Economic Planning Board to screen applications by Korean firms for foreign finance. ==The power to control which firms would receive foreign credit thus came to be used by the government as a tool of industrial policy. This power was used extensively when Korean firms, under government direction, began to invest in highly capital-intensive activities—the heavy sectors of which Park dreamed—during the early 1970s.== 

As growth took off in Korea, national savings rose from essentially zero in the early 1960s to close to 20 percent of GDP in 1970. This jump enabled a growing fraction of domestic capital formation to be financed domestically rather than internationally. Savings as a percentage of GDP continued to grow after 1970, reaching almost 25 percent of GDP in 1980, close to 30 percent in 1985, and more than 35 percent in 1990; ==Korea thereby transformed itself from a low-savings nation to one of the world's highest savings nations==. Although this change enabled Korea to become less dependent on capital from abroad to finance investment, rates of Korean capital formation in most years nonetheless continued to outstrip domestic savings. Thus, Korea continued to be a significant net capital importer, as reflected in a negative balance of payments on the current account, until the middle 1980s. ==But the greater availability of domestic savings to finance investment implied that those sectors into which this investment was directed could be increasingly determined by the government without being constrained by foreign creditors.== 

==In fact, as domestic savings grew in Korea, control over how to direct those savings fell almost completely in the government's hands, because in 1962 the Park government had brought the financial sector largely under government control.== Most banks were nationalized, and a law was passed enabling the government to protect lenders from default risk on at least some loans by means of government loan guarantees. This measure set in motion a process by which banks and other lending institutions became willing to take larger risks than they might otherwise have done. ==But, at the same time, because they were protected from default, these institutions over time failed to fully develop the capability to assess and manage risk, a failing that was to hurt Korea in the future.== 

==The government's control over loan allocation in fact increased during the Park years. Initially the government made generally available through the banks subsidized loans for working capital to any firm that could demonstrate success in exporting. But in later years subsidized long-term loans increasingly were available only to those firms specifically designated by the government.== 

==Because of government control of lending and the preferential terms on which many loans were made, by the late 1960s Korean firms had already become very debt-heavy in their financial structures.== The debt-to-equity ratio of the Korean corporate sector was upwards of 400 percent, much higher than in most nations. One consequence was that in 1969 a number of highly indebted companies in Korea were teetering on the edge of bankruptcy, and this number grew in 1970 and 1971. The cumulative result was that Korea faced an international liquidity crisis in 1971 because many of the troubled firms had large foreign loans on the books. In response, the International Monetary Fund forced Korea to devalue the won. This helped exports but also raised the won value of foreign debt held by the troubled corporations, forcing a reduction in foreign borrowing. ==In 1972, in an effort to ease the financial burden on Korean firms, Park attempted to control the curb market, the largely informal and uncontrolled market for funds that existed outside of the banking system.== Lenders in the curb market were told that there would be a three-year moratorium on repayment of debt incurred by firms through this market. ==This action had the unintended effect of reducing the wealth of the many Korean households that had lent their saving to the curb market. Households reacted by refusing to invest new funds in it. Because many businesses were dependent on the curb market for liquid funds, the overall result proved to be the reverse of what was sought: financial pressures on most firms were increased, not reduced.== When this became apparent, Park backed off his efforts to control this market. Even so, with this misstep the popularity of the Park government, which had been very much based on economic successes, began to wane. 

As part of the drive to increase exports, the Park government initiated a number of diplomatic moves during its early years. ==The first, in 1965, was to normalize diplomatic relations with Japan, enabling commercial relationships to develop between Japanese firms and Korean firms.== This normalization was highly unpopular, but it bolstered the export capabilities of Korean firms, which in some cases became major suppliers to Japanese firms. As a result, Korean firms gained not only export markets that otherwise would have been unavailable but also a channel by which Japanese technology was transferred to the Korean suppliers. Thus, Korean firms became suppliers to Japanese firms in a number of sectors in which the Korean firms were new entrants, such as the manufacture of electrical and electronic components and other light manufacturing that was more technology intensive than textiles and footwear. For a time, the success of these new ventures further strengthened the hand of the EPB, which continued to argue that Korea's future lay in gradually “deepening” the capital-to-labor ratio of Korean industry and in upgrading Korea's export sectors by advancing skill and knowledge rather than by immediately establishing heavy capital-intensive industry. ==Knowledge-intensive light and medium industries were seen by the EPB as activities in which Korea held latent comparative advantage, but Park continued to dream of heavy industry.== 

Other diplomatic moves fed into the drive to transform Korea into an exporting nation. ==Trade agreements negotiated by the Park government with a number of countries enlarged the number of markets to which Korean firms could sell.== Trade-related institutions such as the Korea Trade Promotion Agency (KOTRA), Korea Traders Association (KTA), and the Federation of Korean Industries (FKI), as well as numerous industry-specific trade associations, were created to help facilitate trade. KOTRA was a government agency charged with finding export business opportunities and educating Korean business as to how to avail themselves of those opportunities. (KOTRA also had the power to tax Korean imports, raising revenues that were meant to finance KOTRA's export promotion activities but were also used as political slush funds by Park.) The KTA was a private-sector group that worked with KOTRA to realize overseas market opportunities, and during the Park years it was effectively under KOTRA's control. The FKI was formed by that group of entrepreneurs that had been branded by Park in 1962 as corrupt and who subsequently pledged their personal fortunes to the development of Korea. Even so, the FKI was to become the major vehicle by which the government conveyed its marching orders to Korean industrialists. ==The new Korean institutions all contributed to the continued rise of Korea as an exporter of light manufactured goods, including final goods as well as intermediate goods such as electronic components.== For example, by 1970 Korea had emerged as a major exporter of footwear as well as textile and apparel products, and of a variety of other light manufactured goods such as women's accessories and electronics products. 

We can thus summarize the early Park years: Following a disappointing decade after the Korean War, Korea under Park's leadership attempted “export-led growth” policies (intermixed with import-substitution policies). The export-led policies were quite successful, as measured by growth of Korea's exports from sectors in which the country held demonstrated comparative advantage (mostly the textile and apparel sectors). The policies initiated under Park and the EPB simply worked far better than did the earlier policies attempted under Rhee. However, even in the midst of this reversal of the poor performance of the Rhee era, Korean planners in the EPB worried that the positive results might not be sustainable. In particular, as detailed in the next section, they were concerned that Korea might, over time, lose comparative advantage in those sectors in which Korean firms were currently exporting successfully. They also were under constant pressure from Park to include in their plans the establishment of heavy industry. Thus, in the coming years, the government was to engage in a large-scale experiment in industrial policy, with the aim of creating new sectors in Korea in which domestic firms could become internationally competitive.

## The HCI Drive

Beginning in the late 1960s and continuing over the next 10 years or so, the direction of Korea's policies toward the creation of export industries changed, particularly under what has come to be known as the “heavy and chemical industries (HCI) drive” that was formally launched in 1973. ==As suggested in the previous section, this change of economic strategy was accompanied by a change in the style of Park's leadership, which became increasingly authoritarian during the 1970s—especially after the 1971 election, which was followed by a series of protests.== Park's response in 1972 was to declare martial law and then to change the Korean constitution to make himself president for life. In 1973 Kim Dae-jung, who after the 1971 election had become the main leader of what organized opposition to Park existed, was abducted from a Tokyo hotel by Korean security agents who intended to assassinate him. International disapproval of this incident was loud and swift, particularly on the part of the United States and Japan. The Japanese government was especially outraged because the kidnapping had taken place on Japanese soil. Kim was spared death largely because of rapid intervention by the US ambassador to Korea, Philip Habib, who made it clear that the United States would view Kim's death as a serious matter that would affect relations between Korea and the United States. 

==This incident also caused the popularity of the Park government within Korea itself to drop even further. Indeed, as a result of this failed kidnapping and the increasingly repressive nature of the Korean government, the whole period of the HCI drive, especially its last years, was a time of rising domestic discontent, even though economic growth through much of this period remained positive.== Because this was also the period during which the largest of the chaebol began to take shape, there exists in Korea to this day an association of the rise of these firms with the repressive aspects of the last years of Park's rule. 

The genesis of the change of economic policy was to be found in the EPB's second five-year plan. This plan, announced in 1967, was meant to cover the period 1971-76. In many ways it mimicked the first five-year plan; for example, it called for specific goals with respect to increased exports and industrial production. However, the plan also suggested that the sectoral composition of exports should change, with the emphasis moving from light manufacturing to heavy manufacturing industries—a shift clearly favored by Park even if not endorsed wholeheartedly by the EPB itself. As early as 1967, some movement in this direction already in fact had begun. But the second five-year plan sought to accelerate the shift. Accordingly, a series of industry-specific acts (detailed below) were passed in the years 1967-70 that signaled exactly what sectors would be promoted by the government.

In the meantime, Hyundai had competition. The most successful was Kia, which had been founded in 1944 to manufacture bicycles but had in the intervening years diversified into motorcycle production (1961) and small trucks (1967). In late 1974, Kia beat Hyundai to the punch by producing the first car of Korean design actually to roll out of a Korean factory (Ford was a minority shareholder in Kia). Another small entrant into the automobile sector, Asia Motors, proved to be an “unsound firm” and was acquired by Kia in 1976. A somewhat more successful new entrant, Shinjin, did well during the 1960s as an assembler of General Motors vehicles but was unable during the HCI period to create a product that could compete successfully with Hyundai's Pony. Shinjin, declared unsound in 1978, was acquired by Daewoo, resulting in the formation of Daewoo Motors, set up originally as a 50-50 joint venture with General Motors. From the beginning, the relationship between Daewoo and General Motors was difficult. In 1992 General Motors relinquished much of its control of Daewoo Motors, becoming a minor shareholder, and Daewoo subsequently went on a major binge of expansion that would help to lead the already troubled group to bankruptcy. But after the bankruptcy of Daewoo in 2000 and following protracted negotiations, General Motors acquired Daewoo Motors in 2002.

## The End of the HCI Drive, and an Evaluation 

It was apparent by 1976 that the HCI drive was creating major problems in Korea; the fourth five-year plan, issued that year, indicated that of the industries originally designated for development, only three—steel, shipbuilding, and heavy machinery—would be granted continued support (Clifford 1994). Even this decision did not reflect a dispassionate judgment as to which sectors were likely winners. Rather, these were the sectors into which large sums of money had already been sunk, creating gigantic facilities in which thousands of Koreans were already employed (Cho S. 1994). In other designated sectors where significant employment had not been created, projects were scaled back or canceled—for example, in nonferrous metals and fertilizers (which were to have become the backbone of the chemical side of the HCI drive). 

Even so, the HCI drive ended not in that year but in 1979, when Park was assassinated. The assassination was linked to riots during October by laborers in the cities of Masan and Pusan. These riots were, at least in part, instigated by President Park's order that Kim Young-sam, later to become Korea's president but then a rising opposition politician in the