---
tags:
- Science
- Biology
- Ecology
---
# 14.2 Community Interactions 
Created: 2022-05-13 05:26  

There are two main types of interactions organisms can have in an ecosystem. One is competition, which is where organisms have to fight for some limited biotic and/or aboitic resource, and the other is symbiosis, which is where organisms benefit or harm from another for their own benefit. There are many specific types of both interactions. 

## Competition
- Two organisms fight for the **same limited resource** 

### Interspecific competition 
- Competition between **different species** 
- Ex. grass and dandelions competing for space, nutrients, and water on a lawn 

### Intraspecific competition 
^a5c6b9
- Competition between **same species** 
- Ex. male birds of the same species competing for space to mate 

## Predation 
- One organism eating another 
- Ex. snakes and mice have a predator-prey relationship 
- Note: herbivores are also predators of plants 

## Symbiosis 
- A close relationship between two or more organisms of **different species** that live in direct contact with one another 
	→ Interspecfic interaction 
- Three types: mutualism, commensalism, & parasitism 

### Mutualism 
- **Win-Win** relationship (all organisms are benefited) 
- Ex. bats & cacti 
	- The bat benefits from the cactus by eating its fruit and nectar, and the cactus benefits from the bat by having its seeds spread by the bat 

### Commensalism 
- **Win-neutral** 
	- One organism recieves a benefit, while the other is neither harmed nor benefited 
- Ex. microscopic mites (demodicids) that feed on dead skin on humans' eyelashes 

### Parasitism 
- **Win-Lose** 
- Similar to predation, but parasites **keep the host alive for a long period of time** to reap its maximum benefits 
- Ex. braconid wasps lay its eggs inside a caterpillar which later hatches and eats the caterpillar from inside-out 

#### Ectoparasite
- Parasites that live on the **outside** surface of its host 
- Many also carry diseases that harm the host 
- Ex. fleas, ticks, leeches 

#### Endoparasite 
- Parasites that live on the **inside** of its host 
- Ex. tapeworms, hook-worms 